[Music]
welcome to topcasts and
episode 3 or part 3 rather of
chapter 1 the theory of everything from
the fabric of reality by
david deutsch before i begin a little
note on my setup some people have been
saying that it's a bit distracting when
i am
actually reading from one of the books
that i read from
because i'm not staring straight into
the screen i'm going to try and remedy
this if anyone has any ideas for me
about precisely how to go about doing
that so it's not so distracting
i'd be happy to hear them but one of the
reasons it hasn't been a priority is
because
the overwhelming majority of people
actually only listen they don't actually
watch i think the downloads from the
podcast version the audio only version
are like 10 times greater than the views
that i get on youtube
um and so it would be so much more
simple uh efficient if i didn't bother
putting together the video because the
video actually takes a
lot longer to edit and all that sort of
stuff audio is much easier to deal with
nonetheless i like doing the video so
i'm going to persevere with that but if
you have any ideas about
how i can read by doing this which is me
like looking at the screen right now
while simultaneously looking straight at
the camera i would appreciate it i use
an
iphone one of the the more recent
iphones or iphone 11
in order to actually record the video
and the audio goes into that
don't need to go into the technical
details but anyway if you have an idea
for how i can
fix the way in which i look at the
camera
whilst simultaneously reading then that
would be great i know a thing called an
auto cue exists
but um presumably that's quite a
professional piece of gear
anyway no more preamble let me get into
the reading for today and we're getting
very close to the end of the chapter
it's a very
fun part of the end of the chapter
because we start to encounter
some real seeds and i'm going to mention
that word a few times today
real seeds of the science of cannon cats
which is sitting there behind me by
chiara malita
the beginnings of constructor theory
they're right here in the fabric of
reality and so i'm going to
concentrate a little on that today not
only in the fabric of reality
in the first few pages of the fabric of
reality
so let's go and i'm at the point where
david says on page 23.
quote in the reductionist worldview the
laws governing subatomic particle
interactions are of
paramount importance as they are the
base of the hierarchy
of all knowledge but in the real
structure of scientific knowledge
and in the structure of our knowledge of
reality such laws have a
much more humble role what is that role
it seems to me that none of the
candidates for a
theory of everything that has yet been
contemplated contains much that is new
by way of explanation perhaps the most
innovative approach
from the explanatory point of view is
super string theory
in which extended objects strings rather
than point-like particles
are the elementary building blocks of
matter but no existing approach
offers an entirely new mode of
explanation new in the sense of
einstein's explanation of gravitational
forces
in terms of curved space and time
pausing there just my reflection on this
so david has said right there that
nothing about the other conceptions
of the way in which we might improve
physics off into the infinite future
string theory is one such
is a new mode of explanation this term
mode of explanation is right there at
the beginning of the fabric of reality
and that's remarkable
because here in 1997 we have the
motivation for constructive theory we
have the phrase
mode of explanation we can see those
seeds as i've talked about in previous
episodes for the fabric of reality
for what is happening right now over the
last few years and right now in 2021
it's almost like a prediction of the
content of future knowledge isn't it
not quite that's a joke of course but
it's clear david is appealing for a new
way forward in physics
it seems like no one else really took up
the mantle between 1997
through to today so he did and
chiara and others and it's another good
reason for me to be doing this book
right now alongside kiara's book
here we are getting the appeal for that
new
fundamental theory and there in kiara's
book we are getting the
description and explanation of what has
been accomplished so far
with this exact new theory constructor
theory
so it's a wonderful symmetry between the
two books
back to this book the fabric of reality
and david writes
quote in fact the theory of everything
is expected to inherit virtually its
entire explanatory structure
its physical concepts its language its
mathematical formalism
and the form of its explanations from
the existing theories of
electromagnetism nuclear forces and
gravity
therefore we may look to this underlying
structure
which we already know from existing
theories for the contribution of
fundamental physics to our
overall understanding there are two
theories in physics
which are considerably deeper than all
others
the first is the general theory of
relativity which as i have said
is our best theory of space time and
gravity
the second quantum theory is even deeper
between them these two theories and not
any existing or currently envisaged
theory of subatomic particles
provide the detailed explanatory and
formal framework
within which all other theories and
modern physics are expressed and they
contain overarching physical principles
to which all other theories can form a
unification of general relativity and
quantum theory
to give a quantum theory of gravity has
been a major quest of theoretical
physicists
for several decades and would have to
form part of
any theory of everything in either the
narrow or the broad
sense of the term as we shall see in the
next chapter
quantum theory like relativity provides
a revolutionary
new mode of explanation of physical
reality the reason why quantum theory is
the deeper of the two
lies more outside physics than within it
for its ramifications are very wide
extending far beyond physics and even
beyond science itself
as it is normally conceived okay pausing
there just my reflection on this
so yes quantum theory is the deeper of
the two we've got general relativity and
we've
got quantum theory both of which purport
to be
explanations of the universe as a whole
in a certain sense
the reason why quantum theory is the
deeper of the two is because
it affects other areas of
our knowledge more so than what general
relativity seems to
in another video that i did called the
nexus
which was some personal musings on the
nature of personhood
i try to describe what the implications
are
of our most modern understanding of
quantum theory upon this question of
what it means to be a person
because we exist in a multiverse and the
multiverse consists of these
interesting entities called fungible
things
okay so fungibility is this idea of
where a particle or even a larger object
an ensemble of particles which includes
something like a human body
is extended across the multiverse and so
in order to understand the nature of
personhood
more fully you need to grapple with
quantum theory
so i think quantum theory absolutely has
deep implications for the nature of
personhood
it also of course has ramifications for
the field of computation
and this is what david deutsch actually
proved in his famous
1986 paper one of the things he's
most famous for beyond writing books is
this
particular proof that he did this proof
of the possibility the physical
possibility
of quantum computation which means that
now computation is
truly a part of physics so quantum
theory's got ramifications there and
therefore it's also got
ramifications for mathematics because it
provides
a limit constraints on what can be
proved
given those quantum mechanical laws so
because quantum mechanical laws are
universal they apply to everything
in the universe including the brains of
mathematicians
it limits what those brains of those
mathematicians can do or what computers
can do that are made out of matter
and so quantum theory has this reach
into mathematics even into pure
mathematics because
it is the very thing which
tells you what laws computers things
that prove stuff which includes human
brains
can do what they are able to do and then
it also reaches therefore into
epistemology
beyond mathematics because it provides
constraints on our ability to perfectly
know anything at all we are necessarily
fallible
because we're error-prone human beings
due to just making mistakes but those
mistakes
are also embedded there in the laws of
physics
and related to this quantum theory
mandates that not everything can be
known
simultaneously that mata behaves in ways
governed by quantum mechanical laws
such that we have to rule out epistemic
certainty
or in simple language no you cannot be
sure of
anything you can have good explanations
but they must remain fallible
even the contents of your own memory
must remain
fallible given quantum theory among
other things and so that
that has ramifications for psychology
and so it goes
so these are just some of the senses in
which quantum theory
has implications for all those other
areas that we
typically partition off from the rest of
science
okay back to the book and david writes
quantum theory is one of what i shall
call
the four main strands of which our
current understanding of the fabric of
reality is composed
before i say what the other three
strands are i must mention another way
in which
reductionism misrepresents the structure
of scientific knowledge
not only does it assume that explanation
always consists of analyzing a system
into smaller simpler systems
it also assumes that all explanation is
of later events in terms of earlier
events
in other words that the only way of
explaining something is to state its
causes and this implies that the earlier
the events in terms of which we explain
something the better the explanation so
that ultimately the best explanations of
all
are in terms of the initial state of the
universe just pausing there
there we're getting constructive theory
again this idea that the best
explanations are in terms of
something that happened earlier that
caused something to happen later is of
course
all this dynamical laws and initial
conditions vision of physics this uh
kind of narrow way of viewing the way
in which the universe evolves over time
of the way in which
change happens at all in the universe
back to the book david writes a theory
of everything which excludes a
specification of the initial state of
the universe is not a complete
description of physical reality
because it provides only laws of motion
and laws of motion by themselves
make only conditional predictions that
is they never state categorically what
happens but only what
will happen at one time given what was
happening
at another time only if a complete
specification of the initial status
provided
can a complete description of physical
reality in principle
be deduced pausing their um yeah my
reflection again so
i have heard theoretical physicists
specifically particle physicists say
that the
deeper theory of everything would be one
that would provide the initial
conditions in some way
as a matter of necessity like
mathematical
necessity now i suppose that's one way
to go
of course all you then get out of that
so-called theory of everything is again
this reductionist idea that gives you
that would give you the initial
conditions and then the dynamical laws
presumably
and you would have this deeper theory
this deeper mathematical theory that
says well these initial conditions
can only be in such and such a way but
whatever that theory is that gives you
these initial conditions of the universe
you might ask of that theory why it has
the form that it does
i suppose you get into some kind of
infinite regress then
i don't know exactly how they resolve
this anyways whatever the case
david in that passage there and in the
next few passages
is really emphasizing this idea that
this
initial conditions dynamical laws kind
of thing
the the laws of motion and initial
conditions problem
doesn't seem to be able to provide a
true theory of everything
so he's really providing clues there for
someone else
had they wanted to create constructor
theory
it reminds me a little bit of another
book that i've read recently
called from zero to one which is by the
entrepreneur
peter thiel if you don't know who he is
he's elon musk's sort of offsider he's
another billionaire
he was elon musk's offsider he worked on
paypal and so on
smart guy businessman anyway his book
from zero to one is about how to create
a business or a startup young people
come up to him and want to know how to
become rich themselves by
creating a new business they seem to be
after the recipe the algorithm
of course his advice is he can't
possibly tell you that
because there is no such algorithm there
is no recipe
if it were that simple then everyone
would just follow the recipe and become
rich
but that's the very point about
creativity
similarly physicists want to make
fundamental breakthroughs
they need creativity here in the fabric
of reality we've got the same thing
there are clues
here for the taking for anyone who might
have wanted to
conceive of a new mode of explanation
but the thing is with any of this stuff
it has to be a very personal thing it
has to be part of
your personal problem situation as papa
might put it
unless you are truly really
invested in the problem then you won't
spend much time thinking about it david
did of course
so much that he wrote a book on it and
then he went on to
begin to solve the problems that he is
laying out here in constructor theory
the point is anyone can do it
they just have to choose to do it and
become
interested in it but most won't most
won't actually be
that genuinely interested even people
with physics degrees
i have a physics degree it doesn't mean
anything in terms of trying to
create fundamental theories because
that's not part of my problem situation
i'm genuinely not deeply interested
enough
i'm more interested in for example in my
particular problem situation
trying to explain ideas that have
already been discovered in new ways so
that people out there who have a casual
interest
can to some extent level up and learn
more about this
and perhaps then develop a really
deep interest in it i think that's what
sort of my function is in this
i don't have any illusions that i'm
going to make deep breakthroughs here
but maybe
someone listening will be enticed to go
off and
read the details read the technical
details and then they
perhaps will make some of the more
fundamental breakthroughs
it all depends on what you find
fun doing i have fun just talking about
this
and solving the problem of trying to
explain it
with ever more clarity in more and more
simple
terms to the extent that i can but what
i notice sometimes
is that well i'll just say it sometimes
people seem to
kid themselves i see this in physics to
some extent
people who say they either want to be
physicists
want to make breakthroughs they're
already in physics but
you dig a little and it's quickly
apparent that this is not
how their life is quite set up they're
actually
invested rather more in other things
they have
other interests as well they have other
problems and that's perfectly fine
but there might be something that
psychologists call to the extent that it
exists
cognitive dissonance not really being
aware that your explicit words about
what you're trying to achieve
don't quite match up to what you're
doing day-to-day in reality behind the
scenes
to put this another way einstein it
might have been thought while he was
working at a patent
office was just working on relativity
as a kind of hobby but that would be to
misunderstand what was going on
so many of his waking moments were
devoted solely
to figuring out these problems he was
obsessed by the fun of finding this
stuff
out and later on being a physicist
wasn't a job that he
clocked into and worked up until
morning tea and then clocked off again
and then went back to work at his desk
for another few hours while checking
emails and so on no
he was utterly obsessed with figuring
out specific problems and he made
progress because he was passionate
and he found joy in solving these
particular problems
and there's a difference there between
that kind of
approach towards problem solving in a
specific area
and those who might say that that's what
they want to do
but instead are splitting their
attention
and their fun between many other things
and of course that's totally fine this
is not a judgment
it is the difference between being able
to
because you have a finite amount of
attention and a finite amount of
creativity
given a certain amount of finite time
in order to solve particular problems
and if you are
utterly obsessed with certain problems
then you're probably going to make
you're possibly going to make
more progress there than someone who is
not
quite so obsessed that's my diversion
on the psychology of making
progress in in physics and in elsewhere
i don't do it often
and i'm not about to be doing it often
here either
so let's go back to the book and david
writes
current cosmological theories do not
provide a complete specification of the
initial state even in principle
but they do say that the universe was
initially very small very hot
and very uniform in structure we also
know it cannot have been
perfectly uniform because that would be
incompatible according to the theory
with the distribution of galaxies we
observe across the sky today
the initial variations in density
lumpiness
would have been greatly enhanced by
gravitational clumping that is
relatively dense regions would have
attracted more matter
and become denser so they need only have
been very slight initially
pausing there yes my reflection on this
this this lumpiness
was a mystery for some time it was it
was a mystery
until the kobe the
the the satellite satellite telescope
called the cosmic microwave background
explorer
which took the first images uh somewhere
between 1989 and 1993
of the cosmic microwave background the
heat left over
after the big bang now
prior to kobe the thing was that
wherever
we pointed out telescopes effectively
temperature probes at the sky
we found exactly the same temperature
everywhere 2.3
above absolute zero 2.3 kelvin
or 2.3 degrees celsius above absolute
zero the minimum possible temperature
so the universe is bathed in this heat
but it's extremely
uniform and that is that's kind of a
problem it's a problem because
the universe itself when you look in the
visual band or in any other band aside
from the microwave band if you're
looking
if you're looking at things other than
at that temperature
you find lumpiness as david says here
and this is in fact what the astronomers
and the astrophysicists talk about the
cosmologists talk about they talk about
the lumpiness of the universe
the universe there are regions where
there are galaxies that's a lump
and the regions between galaxies which
have nothing at all
but why is the distribution of matter
the way that it is given the cosmic
microwave background
is not lumpy well the cosmic microwave
background explorer this satellite that
was put up there in
the late 80s early 90s revealed
that in fact the cosmic microwave
background
is lumpy after all it's not perfectly
uniform it
has these regions of
cooler and warmer and the cooler areas
are going to be the places where
in the early universe the mata would
have
been attracted towards that's where it
would have collapsed
and in the warmer areas where the matter
would have expanded out so you get the
voids in the area
where you get a higher temperature and
in the cooler areas that's where the
galaxies form and that's where the stars
form
that's where your your glowing matter
forms
and and this is this is uh george smoot
was awarded
the nobel prize for this uh although his
student is charlie lineweaver that i've
talked about
very very often it was his uh research
student his phd student at the time i
think it was his phd she might have been
his graduate student
anyway uh charlie lineweber the great
charlie lineweaver he's also
one of these visitors not on social
media which is a great shame
he's got this wonderful list of papers
that stretch
from biology and cancer through to
cosmology and astrophysics and planetary
science and all this sort of great stuff
and he's a great speaker as well you can
find him
on youtube and i always talk him up
because he was my lecturer
and so he tells the story about how
he was actually the one that processed
the data
and he was looking for that data from
the cosmic microwave background explorer
and it was like 2 a.m one early one
morning that he finally figured out we
do have
the so-called anisotropis which is a
fancy name for this lumpiness this
variation in the cosmic microwave
background and he was so excited he had
to get on his push bike and
and ride to george smoot's house and and
and slip the
um the the the research he slipped the
discovery of the the anisotropy's
underneath george smoot's door
uh i think with the words we found it uh
written on the top of it and so
that was the moment that was the moment
of the discovery of the
cosmic microwave background anisotropics
now why is this someone who cares about
this well
the reason that you get these
anisotropies that these variations in
the temperature
goes back to quantum theory um
stephen hawking actually described it as
like looking at the face of god looking
at this image it's like looking at the
face of god
it's a bit of an exaggeration of course
but basically the lumpiness is there
in the earliest universe the the
earliest image
we have of the universe that lumpiness
seems to be explained by
quantum mechanical laws the quantum
fluctuations acting on a universe which
was
small enough you know the size of an
atom or whatever such at the effects
back then had lumpiness in them but
quantum mechanical laws lead to this
lumpiness
and so then when the universe expanded
so too did the lumpiness
and so you get this lumpiness today on
the
very largest scales because
that is an image of what it was like
at the beginning of time because the
beginning of time was quite
was governed by quantum mechanical laws
which necessarily led to this sort of
thing if we didn't have
quantum mechanical laws presumably the
universe would
have been perfectly uniform and it would
have expanded out
such that you wouldn't get lumpiness
which means you might not have gotten
stars
in the way that we have stars now you
certainly wouldn't have had the
distribution of galaxies in the way that
they are now
so i find that absolutely astounding
it's astounding to think
that the effects of
quantum theory at the very smaller
scales namely on
the universe when it was much smaller
than an atom
can be seen today revealed today
in the universe as a whole the the
structure of the universe as a whole the
very largest scales
have been determined by what was going
on
at the beginning of the universe which
shouldn't be so surprising i mean this
is
what goes on with initial conditions and
dynamical laws after all
anyway if you want to learn more about
that you can look up the
the history of the cosmic microwave
background explorer after that
by the way there was this thing called
wmap the wilkinson
microwave anisotropy probe and so they
they
improved the image of the of kobe of the
cosmic microwave background
and today um the most recent one is the
planck the planck satellite has
has again given us images of this to
even
greater resolution so a very interesting
area of science
one of these pieces of evidence
explained by the theory of the big bang
okay after that extended self-indulgent
diversion
let's go back to the book and david
writes but slight though they were this
variations in density is what he's
talking about
but like though they were they are of
the greatest significance
in any reductionist description of
reality because almost everything that
we see happening around us
from the distribution of stars and
galaxies in the sky to the appearance of
bronze statues on planet earth
is from the point of view of fundamental
physics a consequence of those
variations
if our reductionist description is to
cover anything more than the grossest
features of the observed universe
we need a theory specifying those
all-important initial deviations from
uniformity
let me try to restate this requirement
without the reductionist bias
the laws of motion for any physical
system
make only conditional predictions and
are therefore compatible with many
possible histories of that system this
issue is independent of the limitations
on predictability
that are imposed by quantum theory which
i shall discuss
in the next chapter for instance the
laws of motion governing a cannonball
fired from a gun are compatible
with many possible trajectories one for
each
possible direction and elevation in
which the gun could have been pointing
when it was fired
and this is the figure from the fabric
of reality mathematically the laws of
motion can be expressed as a set of
equations
called the equations of motion these
have many different solutions one
describing each
possible trajectory to specify which
solution describes the actual trajectory
we must provide supplementary data some
data about
what actually happens one way of doing
that is to specify the initial state
in this case the direction in which the
gun was pointing but there are other
ways too
for example we could just as well
specify the final state the position and
direction of motion of the cannonball at
the moment it lands
or we could specify the position of the
highest point of the trajectory
it does not matter what supplementary
data we give so long as they pick out
one particular solution
of the equations of motion okay pausing
there now for more on this
you can see chapter two of
the science of canon cart by cara
marletto there's a deep symmetry as i've
already said between these two books
and to understand a little bit more
about this uh
the topic is projectile motion and if
you have the trajectory of a projectile
then there are unique coordinates x and
y
well not unique coordinates there are
specific coordinates x and y
which pick out a unique trajectory
for any given projectile as you can see
there
with the picture that david has provided
there's going to be
if you pick out in the plane that's
there in fact you'll have
x y and z coordinates in that particular
three dimensional version of it
if you pick out particular x y
z coordinates there will be only one
of those possible trajectories that will
fit
that x y z coordinate that x y z
coordinate
is the initial condition so to speak the
supplementary data we sometimes call it
initial conditions if it's at the
beginning the final conditions which is
at the end
or any other condition in between so
supplementary data is what you need you
need a
you need a point along the trajectory to
pick out
that particular trajectory as unique and
different to all the other ones that
could have possibly happened but why
that particular one
well that's the open question especially
when applied to the whole universe
and that's what david's about to get to
so let's go back to the book where he
writes
the combination of any such
supplementary data
with the laws of motion amounts to a
theory that describes everything that
happens to the cannonball
between firing and impact similarly the
laws of motion for physical reality as a
whole would have
many solutions each corresponding to a
distinct history
to complete the description we should
have to specify which history
is the one that has actually occurred by
giving enough supplementary data to
yield
one of the many solutions of the
equations of motion in simple
cosmological models at least
one way of giving such data is to
specify the initial state of the
universe
but alternatively we could specify the
final state or the state at any other
time
or we could give some information about
the initial state some about the final
state and some about the states in
between
in general the combination of enough
supplementary data of any sort with the
laws of motion
would amount to a complete description
in principle of physical reality
pausing there yes that's precisely right
but as we've been keen
to highlight such a description would be
at best a predictive kind of description
it would never actually explain much at
all about what
happened like for example evolution
knowledge creation
and therefore increasingly from this
moment onwards
what actually occurs in the universe
because from this moment onwards
knowledge creation will become the
dominant unfolding feature of the
universe
into the distant future so long as we
don't go extinct and
perhaps there are other people out there
whatever the case
we are going to begin constructing
around us
transforming physical reality around us
and that is to do with
the knowledge we have trying to
understand why
certain things are going to happen for
example the construction of cities
is not going to be explained by these
simple
laws of physics and supplementary data
what we need of course is an explanation
in terms of
people's choices and their wanting to
create certain things and so on and so
forth okay so
we've made that point throughout the
beginning of infinity but here it is
in the fabric of reality back to the
book and david writes
for the cannonball once we have
specified say
the final state it is straightforward to
calculate the initial state and vice
versa so there is no practical
difference
between different methods of specifying
the supplementary data
but for the universe most such
calculations are intractable
pausing there oh yes this is to put
things mildly of course
it's intractable to try to figure out
the trajectories of all the particles
in the entire universe yes
given that for a single particle just
pick any single particle like an
electron
there's no sense in which the
observables you need in order to make a
precise prediction
can be known simultaneously anyway sam
kuipers who is a physicist who
collaborates with david deutch has
written
and collaborated with uh david deutsch
on a number of papers he's written some
on his own
exploring variations subtle variations
to
quantum theory about a related point but
i won't go into the details
uh about that but you can see here for
sam's excellent
papers they're highly technical and i
guess to be true to be honest they're
not
precisely related to what i'm about to
mention here but i just want to observe
that on this point about a deterministic
universe and i've said this before
it's true in a very basic sense okay
namely
stuff is indeed determined in the
universe we live in a deterministic
universe things happen according to the
laws of physics
and it wouldn't matter if the laws of
physics mandated that
any old random stuff happened that would
still be determined by laws of physics
we are governed by laws of physics
as it happens we're governed by quantum
mechanical laws of physics and
laws of general relativity as well
things happen according to the laws of
physics
but this is utterly different utterly
different
to things being predictable we live in a
deterministic universe
but not in a predictable universe i
would argue
and there is predictable in practice and
there's predictable in principle and i
want to suggest that
neither in principle neither in practice
nor in principle
can we make predictions about the
universe as a whole
let me give the we can't predict
things in practice for the whole
universe
this is the easy one in order to be able
to predict in practice
how the universe is going to evolve over
time
with certainty of some kind
that would mean to know the conditions
of the universe right now
or the initial conditions of the
universe which is basically the same
thing one's not necessarily going to be
easier
than another presumably right now
finding the conditions right now of
every single particle would be easier
than finding the conditions of every
single particle in the deep dark past
because
we only have access to measurements
right now
so can we get this perfect knowledge
that we need of every single particle in
order to
plug in this supplementary data into
our equations of motion for all the
particles
in the universe it would seem to be
clearly not
one would wonder by what mechanism
you're going to make these measurements
of every single particle in the universe
what instruments
would you need to do this uh what are
they made out of
and are these instruments themselves
that do the measurements of the
particles
themselves made of particles for which
you need to
know their conditions at any given time
we have a recursive problem don't we
we'll need instruments measuring
instrument
particles the positions and
momentum presumably of particles but
those instruments themselves are made of
particles so we need to
find the momentum and the position of
those particles as well in the
instruments but to do that we need more
instruments so we've got this
weird infinite regress of trying to
measure everything including
the the measuring devices themselves
so i don't think that in practice it's
possible
and in principle we've got a problem as
well
people often say things like well the
oracle or the supercomputer
to to to take it away from the
supernatural the supposed
quantum supercomputer of the future
might be able to
somehow or other have the conditions of
all particles in the universe
plugged into it and thereby make a
perfect
prediction of how the universe is going
to unfold
off into the infinite future but i don't
think that it can
and and and one reason why i don't think
that it can is because
the conditions right now the the
whatever the conditions are at
time t call it now
in in in this room where i am are going
to be different to the conditions for
particles on the other side of the
galaxy let alone the other side of the
universe
there is no now here now that is the
same
for here as compared to the other side
of the galaxy
relativity tells us that whatever you
think is going on
here right now might be well and good
but your knowledge of what is going on
over there is limited by the finite
speed of light you cannot know
now what is happening there now because
guess what there is no simultaneous now
here and
now over there that is known as the
relativity of simultaneity
now i'm somewhat practiced in explaining
this so
let me do it very very briefly this is
the this is the classic
so-called thought experiment and it goes
like this
let's say you're sitting in the middle
of a train and it's a special kind of
train
where you can pull a chain in the middle
of the train
and it will turn on a light that is
immediately above your head
and to your left and to your right there
is a door
and the door is opened at either end of
the train by
a light so as soon as the light when you
switch it on
reaches the doors the doors will open so
if you're right in the middle of the
train
and you pull the chain and the light
switches on
then it will reach if you're right in
the middle of the train you will reach
the front and the rear doors
simultaneously it will reach both of
those doors at the same time
so both of the doors will open according
to you
at precisely the same time now this is
all dependent on the fact that the speed
of light is constant
it doesn't matter whether the light is
traveling to the left or to the right
forwards or backwards to the rear door
or to the front door
the speed of light is constant always
for all observers
that's a fact that is one of the
postulates of special relativity
but now and here's the key
brain bending thing if you've never
heard it before
let's say you're watching from the
outside of the train
as someone inside the train performs
this experiment
they're turning the light on they're in
the middle of the train they observe
the light travel to the front and rear
the train striking the front and rear
doors
simultaneously causing those doors to
open up
simultaneously but you are now on the
outside let's presume
the train is now moving from the left
to the right the person inside the train
they don't care about this
after all the light's still going to
travel a certain distance to the front
and a certain distance to the back and
that distance happens to be the same
the doors open simultaneously ah but for
the person outside
as they see the train moving from the
left and moving to the right what they
notice is
as the light is switched on as the light
is switched on
it will travel towards the rear of the
train which is coming towards the light
now
so effectively that light beam has a
shorter distance to travel it will
strike that rear door
first whereas the light beam that is
traveling towards the front door
now has further to travel because that
front door has moved away
from where the light began and it has
further to travel
so for the person outside they see the
rear door strike
the beam of light causing that rear door
to open up
not simultaneously with the front door
because at the front
door the light beam is still yet to
reach there
because it's a finite speed of light it
can only travel
so far in so much amount of time and
although it struck the rear door opening
that rear door the front door is still
closed so the
person on the outside of the train sees
that the rear door is opened
and the front door has not yet opened
but the person inside the train says no
i'm here inside the train
and i have seen that both of those doors
have opened simultaneously the person on
the outside says no they haven't
i can see right now i have made an
observation these two doors have not
opened at the same time have not opened
simultaneously
now if you've never heard that before it
can screw with your mind a little bit i
would suggest okay this is the
relativity
of simultaneity and it's to do with the
deep fact of the universe which is
the speed of light is constant this is
not something that we are used to
in day-to-day life people have struggled
for a long time
they did struggle for a long time to
accept that this is true and physicists
know
that this is true and you should accept
that this is true because this is the
explanation of how
things work so people won't agree about
now about what is happening now for the
person inside of the train
they say that now the two doors open
simultaneously
a person on the outside they say no now
the doors didn't open simultaneously in
fact there is no now
in which the doors open simultaneously
in other words even for a simple
situation like this we can't agree
on what the supplementary data might be
okay we can't agree let alone what's
going to happen here compared to the
other side of the universe for every
single particle
now there's a proviso here i
accept because there is something
actually they can agree on that
something is called the
space-time interval they will agree on
what that is
so there is actually something that's
constant in the universe so to speak in
relativity
but that's beyond the scope of what i'm
talking about right now anyways this
all comes to bear on this idea that we
can have something like perfect
knowledge in principle
of the initial conditions of the
universe
now or at any other time making what i
would suggest
an in principle prediction
of the unfolding of the universe despite
the fact everything is determined and in
principle prediction
cannot be done and because the new
principle prediction cannot be done
there's no point debating about what
such and such uh evolution of the
universe
would be if only we knew we can't know
and
among many other things i think this is
well there's many ways but
this is a this is a reason why
reductionists should accept
the fact they shouldn't be reductionists
but one reason why
they can accept the fact that this
provides
scope for genuine creativity in the
universe
things to be able to come into being in
the universe that weren't there before
that can't be adequately explained by
an appeal to the laws of physics things
like knowledge creation
okay so all of that was just a response
to david's sentence there
where he says but for the universe most
such calculations are intractable yes
intractable
to put it mildly back to the book
and he writes i have said that we infer
the existence of
lumpiness in the initial conditions from
observations of lumpiness today
but that is exceptional most of our
knowledge of supplementary data
of what specifically happens is in the
form of high-level theories about
emergent phenomena and is therefore by
definition
not practically expressible in the form
of statements about the initial state
for example in most solutions of the
equations of motion the initial state of
the universe does not have the right
properties for
life to evolve from it therefore our
knowledge that life
has evolved is a significant piece of
the supplementary data
we may never know what specifically this
restriction implies about the detailed
structure of the big bang
but we can draw conclusions from it
directly for example
the earliest accurate estimate of the
age of the earth was made on the basis
of the biological theory of evolution
contradicting the best physics of the
day only a reductionist prejudice could
make us feel that this was somehow a
less valid form of reasoning
or that in general it is more
fundamental
to theorize about the initial state than
about emergent features of reality
even in the domain of fundamental
physics the idea that theories of the
initial state contain our deepest
knowledge
is a serious misconception one reason is
that it logically excludes the
possibility of explaining the initial
state itself
why the initial state was what it was
but in fact we have explanations of many
aspects of the initial state
and more generally no theory of time
can possibly explain it in terms of
anything earlier
yet we do have deep explanations from
general relativity
and even more from quantum theory of the
nature of time
and pausing that again see some more
discussion of this in the science of
canon can't
if you can't wait for my discussion of
the fabric of reality chapter 11 which
is not going to come for
presumably months or of course
hopefully buy the book by the fabric of
reality and get there
much sooner back to the book david
writes
thus the character of many of our
descriptions predictions and
explanations of reality
bear no resemblance to the initial state
plus laws of motion picture that
reductionism leads to
there is no reason to regard high-level
theories as in any way
second-class citizens our theories of
sub-atomic physics
and even of quantum theory or relativity
are in no way
privileged relative to theories about
emergent properties
none of these areas of knowledge can
possibly subsume all the others
each of them has logical implications
for the others but not all the
implications can be stated for they are
emergent properties of the other
theories domains
in fact the very terms high level and
low level are misnomers
the laws of biology say are high level
emergent consequences of the laws of
physics
but logically some of the laws of
physics are then emergent consequences
of the laws of biology it could even be
that between them
the laws governing biological and other
emergent phenomena
would entirely determine the laws of
fundamental physics
this this side pausing there this idea
that
the laws of physics might emerge
from some fundamental laws of biology
reminds me of that scene in the big bang
theory
with um sheldon who's the character
who's the theoretical physicist
and he's debating with who would
eventually be his girlfriend
amy who's a neuroscientist i think and
they're arguing about what's more
fundamental or what's logically prior
the laws of physics or the new laws of
neurobiology
sheldon of course says physics is but
amig has this argument
that given that all of what we know
about physics comes from human brains
anyway
an understanding of how they work must
be a priori in a way
prior to physics if you really want to
understand where physics is coming from
you've got to study the human brain
therefore neuroscience is deeper
than what physics is of course that's a
silly debate and it
it misses the point about um actually
what thinking is and
the fact that the physics is outside of
brains and all that sort of stuff but
it made me think of that and and that
idea that um
david just says there that's quite the
striking claim that the
laws of biology and other emergent
phenomena
might completely determine the laws of
fundamental physics
would certainly upset the sheldon
coopers of the world or anyone who wants
to argue that the physical laws and
initial conditions
picture rules out the reality the
reality of emergent
phenomena free will
excuse me back to the book and david
writes
but in any case when two theories are
logically related
logic does not dictate which of them we
ought to regard as determining
wholly or partly the other that depends
on the explanatory
relationships between the two theories
the truly privileged theories
are not the ones referring to any
particular scale of size or complexity
nor the ones situated at any particular
level of the predictive hierarchy
but the ones that contain the deepest
explanations
the fabric of reality does not only
consist of reductionist ingredients like
space time and subatomic particles
but also of life thought
computation and the other things to
which those explanations refer
what makes a theory more fundamental and
less derivative
is not its closeness to the supposed
predictive base of physics
but its closeness to our deepest
explanatory
theories quantum theory is as i have
said
one such theory but the other three main
strands of explanation through which we
seek to understand the fabric of reality
are all high level from the point of
view of quantum physics
they are the theory of evolution
primarily the evolution of living
organisms
epistemology a theory of knowledge and
the theory of computation
about computers and what they can and
cannot in principle compute
pausing near my reflection so these are
the four strands
quantum theory theory of evolution
epistemology theory of computation
now as i said previously our previous
episodes
uh this idea of theory of everything
well already there's unification
happening here and to some extent we
must concede the theory of computation
really
has been subsumed into physics anyway
it's a theory of physics so it's it's
part of quantum physics i mean the
theory of quantum computation
really is the theory of computation as
viewed through the lens of quantum
theory and
it places you know strict constraints on
what
computers can and can't do namely what
those quantum laws of physics say that
they can
and given that brains the things that
create
knowledge about the universe are a kind
of computer
then the theory of knowledge really is
very much a part of this theory of
computation which is a part of quantum
physics as well so there are these deep
deep links and i said in the nexus video
as well well given that we are evolved
biological organisms we've kinda we
human beings we
are the we are the
thing the entity in the universe that
unifies
all of these things in a very real
physical way okay we've evolved
to create knowledge which is itself
a kind of computation that is done by a
computer
obeying quantum laws of physics okay
so again my nexus video for more about
that okay let's go back to the book and
david writes
as i shall show such deep and diverse
connections have
been discovered between the basic
principles of these four apparently
independent subjects
that it has become impossible to reach
our best understanding
of any one of them without also
understanding the other three
the four of them taken together form a
coherent explanatory
structure that is so far-reaching and
has come to encompass so much of our
understanding of the world
that in my view it may already properly
be called
the first real theory of everything thus
we have arrived
at a significant moment in the history
of ideas the moment when our scope of
understanding
begins to be fully universal up to now
all our understanding has been about
some aspect of reality
untypical of the whole in the future it
will be about
a unified conception of reality all
explanations will be understood against
the backdrop of universality
and every new idea will automatically
tend to illuminate
not just a particular subject but to
varying degrees
all subjects the dividend of
understanding that we will eventually
reap from from this last great
unification
may far surpass that yielded by any
previous one
for we shall see that it is not only
physics that is being unified
and explained here and not only science
but also
potentially the far reaches of
philosophy logic and mathematics ethics
politics and aesthetics perhaps
everything that we currently understand
and probably much that we do not yet
understand pausing near my reflection
if i was to reflect on why
i would bother spending so much of my
time
explaining these ideas why i
would devote a rather large fraction of
my life
to doing this to trying to do public
outreach to trying to spread these ideas
to try and have
people appreciate the significance of
this so that they too could perhaps
contribute uh to uh solving this
particular problem then it's all
encapsulated there
i mean how much more grand a vision of
reality
do you want there have been unifications
in the past
electricity and magnetism into a unified
theory of electromagnetism
by faraday and gauss and others the
unification of
a standard model of particle physics uh
the the unification of space and time by
einstein
you know these unifications that have
happened in physics but here david is
talking about how we can have
the unification of disparate
theories in different subjects coming
together to give us
a far deeper richer
explanation of reality as a whole that
will touch
everything everything everything that we
know philosophy logic mathematics ethics
politics
aesthetics okay he mentions aesthetics
of course in
the beginning of infinity as well it
sharpens that up too so
it's not like this is just throwaway
kind of
hopes that he's that he's dreaming up
here there's
actually been progress made on lots of
these points
between the time of writing through the
beginning of infinity
and through to the science of canon cart
he's on the work as i've said before um
quantum computation that entire field
was a unification of computation and
um quantum theory so it's happened
what more do you want out of life you
know in terms of understanding
and being able to solve problems than
being able to
unify all of that stuff so i i can't
think of a
a better kind of science to really dive
into
than this one all other sciences are
ultimately going to be
aspects of this grand theory of
everything
and of course the interesting thing
about this particular theory of
everything
is it doesn't solve all problems it just
provides a framework in which we can
come to understand solutions to those
problems better and of course
better and so as as as he's said
elsewhere it would
this would only be the first such theory
of everything
giving us a vision there to see the next
theory of everything
which would unify even more presumably
once we have this
this kind of theory of everything we
would then it would reveal
new problems because for any solution
any theory
will open up new problems that we could
not possibly have imagined before
in the world view that we presently
hold and so that would enable new better
solutions to rise to the new better
problems that we discover
let's go back to the last very last part
of the book and then i'll read a little
bit of the glossary that's
that it's a at the end that is at the
end of this book as well
david writes quote what conclusion then
would i address to my younger self who
rejected the proposition that the growth
of knowledge
was making the world ever less
comprehensible i would agree with him
though i now think that the important
issue is not really whether
what our particular species understands
can be understood by
one of its members it is whether the
fabric of reality itself is truly
unified
and comprehensible there is every reason
to believe
that it is as a child i merely knew this
now i can explain it
end of the chapter okay and there's
terminology at the end there's
there's a little glossary at the end and
i won't always read this but i just
think that
there's some stuff here that that is
worth
um going over i'm not going to read all
the words in the terminology section in
the little glossary at the end of the
chapter
but this is worth pointing out at the
end of the chapter he's got a definition
of the word explanation and in brackets
he says roughly
a statement about the nature of things
and the reasons for things
so there you see and as i asked david in
my questions for david
one of my recent questions for david and
you can find these on youtube
or on podcast i might even put a link
hopefully i remember i'll put a link
below this video to this particular one
asking david about uh you know sort of
the the motivation for
sharpening up this uh understanding of
what an explanation is in the beginning
of affinity and the fact is ted talk you
know
he says that explanations are hard to
vary
while still accounting for the thing
they purport to account for the
phenomena they purport to account for
but here we don't have that and the
reason um that we don't have it here is
because
uh he thought and he says of himself you
know erroneously he thought that it was
just an uncontroversial kind of a word
but it's not of course uh
we now know that and so he has sharpened
it up very helpfully
for the rest of us and i think that this
really pushes
a popularian epistemology ahead
uh in a in a very valuable way
in because explanations reach
beyond science into every other field
that we happen to be
interested in and it also sharpens up
what science is about science isn't
merely about
testable theories or even testable
explanations it's about
finding good explanations of things good
explanations of things
as defined in the fabric of reality go
to there go there for that
now the next word he defines is
instrumentalism and it's a word that
comes up
here in the beginning infinity elsewhere
and it's going to come up
throughout the fabric of reality
especially as we talk about the physics
sections
instrumentalism means the view that the
purpose of a scientific theory is to
predict
the outcomes of experiments now that
definition is only you know the only
point of that definition
it seems to me it only applies to
physics and even then usually only two
particular kinds of physics particle
physics and quantum physics and stuff
you know it's a bias from those areas
you ask a geophysicist
if the purpose of science is to predict
the outcomes of experiments
and they're not going to be happy with
that okay a geophysicist actually wants
to know
what really is in the center of the
earth or in the ground beneath their
feet
they want to know that that's where the
minerals are okay it's not merely
predicting that
the resistivity found by a particular
meter that you're using to look into the
ground happens to be this or that
that's not what it's about certainly not
what an astronomer wants to know either
okay astronomer wants to know if there
really is a planet
orbiting that star or if that star is a
white dwarf as opposed to a
red giant and so on much less
biology medicine think of any
science that you're interested in okay
instrumentalism is this
weird kind of philosophy that some
philosophers are interested in and
they're only interested in it because
there's this bad turn in
[Music]
theoretical physics quantum physics and
so on okay
the next definition positivism is the
next word positivism
david says an extreme form of
instrumentalism which holds it all
statements
other than those describing or
predicting observations are meaningless
this view is itself meaningless
according to its own criterion
yes precisely okay so positivism just
rules out
understanding uh the world at all
really i mean um describing or
predicting observations i mean
all of philosophy mathematics is not
about observations you know pure
mathematics is not about observations
but it's very useful
there's lots of things that aren't about
observations um
and anyway all statements i mean
what about fiction what about art i mean
what what is a positivist supposed to
and this is where wittgenstein
uh us it's called the two versions of
wittgenstein
you know we blame wittgenstein for a lot
of this right ludwig wittgenstein
in his uh tractatus his first
book this impenetrable kind of it's not
nonsense but but basically
he was trying to say that the purpose of
language is simply to describe stuff
okay and if you if you can't describe
stuff
then well it's pointless useless
metaphysical baggage and you can
you can do away with it but you know
in his latter life you know that the
second wittgenstein wittgenstein version
two
i think his book was philosophical
investigations he
he he rejects what he did in the
tractatus he sort of says well i was
wrong about all that
because he recognizes there's a whole
lot of other reasons that language
has for existing asking people questions
comforting people writing
fiction and so on doing art and there's
all these other functions of language
that aren't just about
describing stuff or stating facts
there are other purposes for language
how this escaped him the first time
around i don't know but he was focused
very very narrowly very narrowly on
science and problems within within
science and and trying to be a
hard-nosed
macho kind of philosopher who just
wanted to get rid of
the the supernatural fair enough um or
discussions of
of mystical stuff fair enough
to some extent fair enough okay i can
understand the motivation even if i
don't
um agree with it um but sometimes people
go too far as i like to say
baby in the bathwater and all that you
know you you want to try and
sharpen up things in philosophy but that
doesn't mean you just do away
with everything just because you've
managed to dissect out certain amounts
of nonsense
okay okay next word david defines i'm
missing a few of them but
he also defines emergence and he says an
emergent phenomena is one
such as life thought or computation
about which there are comprehensible
facts or explanations that are not
simply deducible
from lower level theories but which may
be explicable or predictable
by higher level theories referring
directly to that phenomenon
okay so yes so emergence is a key
part of understanding the world
you need to appreciate that and and
common sense realism is about this right
man on the street type thinking is of
course
of course these things really exist okay
and this is why people make fun of
philosophers you know they
they knock on a table and they go you
know is this real kind of thing this is
real and they have long debates about
whether or not the table is real
man on the street looks at that and goes
yeah that's ridiculous
okay it's like um a small brain big
brain
you know a galaxy brain kind of thing
you know small brain is you know like
the table is real and then supposedly
the big brain philosopher comes along
and says
well actually the table's not real
because all that's there are fundamental
particles
and the fundamental particles are only
things that really truly exist
the table doesn't exist
of course galaxy brain then looks at
that and goes well that's ridiculous
okay all you're doing is um kind of
thinking in the abstract now
you're not really connecting with um how
objects actually do exist in reality
cats exist my cat happens to be sitting
here today
coffee mugs exist you know these
emergent things exist people exist
and in fact some of these things that
are emerging things are also fundamental
things
okay and a fundamental thing is a thing
which features in the explanations of
lots of other things as well i like to
say people are fundamental as
fundamental as fundamental particles are
and one day
we might consider them in a sense more
fundamental than fundamental particles
because people might be able to exist in
a universe without particles
okay we might be able to be instantiated
in something other than
particles i don't know how
right now you know some sort of
gravitational pattern space time or
something
i don't know but in order to have a
person you just need a way of processing
information
anyway people people
are this confluence of as i've already
said and emphasized the
theory of evolution the theory of
computation quantum theory
and epistemology and so we're
fundamental because we appear
uh in a sense across all of those
it well we're not really there in
quantum physics but we're certainly
there in epistemology
epistemology doesn't make sense in a
world in which you don't have knowledge
creators
insofar as you've got evolution in the
universe and there is a possibility of
people arising in such a universe
and if you've got people in such a
universe then you've got these things
that are
computers of a client in fact you just
need animals for that
okay i'm starting to rant and so let me
stop here for today next time we move on
to
chapter two shadows which is
as i have said before probably the
chapter that most affected me when i
first read
the fabric of reality back in 1997
because it was
the the chapter
that cured me of my
up until then complete disillusionment
with
quantum physics i'd been doing quantum
physics at university i didn't
understand what was going on you know i
sort of i could do the problems but it
was like
what am i doing i don't get it it
doesn't make any sense to me
um this is all nonsense and i was i
i was reassured by lecturers that well
yeah it's supposed to be nonsense it's
just a bit weird just
shut up and calculate so to speak and
i'd read lots of popular science books
and none of them really helped they all
made it sound mystical
until shadows until i read the fabric of
reality chapter two so that's next time
look forward to that it's going i would
presume
to be i think i'll get through it fairly
quickly and the reason is
because i've talked about the multiverse
before
i've got a five or six part
series up there on youtube all about the
multiverse and so i'm going to be
referring to that
quite a bit so we'll be doing a
a slimmed down version of chapter two of
the fabric of reality
shadows but until then bye
[Music]
uh
so
[Music]
up